---
tags: rant
---

# customized themes removed from Stack Exchange network

I found today that the Stack Exchange network removed the cability for each site
to customize its theme last year. Users [were complaining][1] but the staff
didn’t seem to be listening. [The reasons they gave][2] were far from convincing:

> Given that highly themed sites are the minority and that the current theming
> level is unsustainable, we're going to have to disappoint here.

It’s unclear how the theming was unsustainable. Technical details were missing.

> In addition, things like voting and favorite buttons are a core part of the
> Q&A experience that should be shared across the network.

I agree that the *presence* and *position* of voting and favorite buttons should
be shared so that new users quickly find them, but why should the *shape* of
buttons be shared? Had any user ever got confused by custom design of a button?

For example, Microsoft keeps the position of Start button for Windows, but the
design (icon) of the button changes for every major version. Users may like the
new button shape or not, but they never have difficulty *finding* the button.

> The benefit is that most sites will have a theme, and theming for all sites
> will extend to the mobile experience.

The additional code for this on mobile platform is *marginal*. As long as the
sprite is clearly specified (just as before), they only need to set the button
image accordingly. I expect software engineers in Stack Overflow to be more
experienced than I am, so it should be easy for them to find a maintainable way
to do this (otherwise the technical difficulty should have been explained in
details).

In comment area:

> That is in addition to making a more scalable and sustainable model that will
> be less likely to break.

Still unclear how it affects scalability. Specify the sprite clearly, and the
community will work out the rest. Sounds like an easy way to cut the cost of
graphic design while attracting more community moderators. And developers only
need to do this *once*.

[1]: https://meta.stackexchange.com/questions/307862/ch-ch-ch-changes-left-nav-responsive-design-themes#307884
[2]: https://meta.stackexchange.com/questions/309349/left-nav-responsive-design-and-theming-next-steps

In [another request][3] it became clear: it’s just their “belief” that buttons
should stay the same. The post has a really good summary of the doubt:

> …it literally cost more money to remove than to keep.

The only solution is to build a [user-style][] replacing the images. This seems
possible since the sprites are still available, such as [Worldbuilding][],
[Super User][], and [Ask Ubuntu][]. I have not yet found any such user-style
on GitHub.

[3]: https://meta.stackexchange.com/questions/312365/rollout-of-new-network-site-themes#312552
[user-style]: https://add0n.com/stylus.html
[worldbuilding]: https://cdn.sstatic.net/Sites/worldbuilding/img/sprites.svg
[Super User]: https://cdn.sstatic.net/Sites/superuser/img/sprites.svg
[Ask Ubuntu]: https://cdn.sstatic.net/Sites/askubuntu/img/sprites.svg
