# debugging locale issue on macOS

Spoiler: the conclusion is simple and silly.

I was setting up my new iMac, and the `gls` (GNU version of `ls`) from MacPorts
couldn’t show Chinese. For example, the file `未命名.md` was shown as

```
''$'\346\234\252\345\221\275\345\220\215''.md'
```

I spent an entire day debugging this issue.

## how I spent the day

In the beginning I wasn’t aware that it’s locale issue. My first guess was that
the MacPorts binary package was broken, which seemed to be verified when `gls`
from Homebrew printed the filename without issue (I installed Homebrew in my
home folder, so bottles won’t work). To compile the port from source, online Q&A
recommended

```sh
sudo port -s install coreutils
```

but this compiles `coreutils` *and its dependencies*. I posted the question on
[Stack Exchange][1], and later asked on [IRC][]. [Joshua][] recommended

```sh
sudo port destroot coreutils
```

which did compile this port without compiling dependencies. Actually it only did
the `destroot` phase (and phases before), without actually installing it, since
installation is a phase *after* `destroot`. The generated executable was found
in folder

```
/opt/local/var/macports/build/
```

The problem persisted for the compiled `gls`. I did some more experiments and
found that `gls` could only show ASCII; it failed to correctly show either
[Korean characters (Hangul)][Hangul] or anything with [diacritical mark][2].
This convinced me that it could be some issue with the port, so I created a
[MacPorts ticket][ticket].

[1]: https://apple.stackexchange.com/questions/381667/force-macports-to-build-from-source
[2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diacritic
[Hangul]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hangul
[IRC]: https://echelog.com/logs/browse/macports/1581202800
[Joshua]: https://github.com/jmroot
[ticket]: https://trac.macports.org/ticket/60065

Then I had some lengthy discussion on IRC with [Clemens][], who correctly
pointed out that my problem can be with locale (finally on the right track).
My locale was like

```
LANG=
LC_COLLATE="C"
LC_CTYPE="UTF-8"
LC_MESSAGES="C"
LC_MONETARY="C"
LC_NUMERIC="C"
LC_TIME="C"
LC_ALL=
```

[Clemens]: https://github.com/neverpanic

This looked very unusual: `$LANG` shouldn’t be empty in any case, and why was
`$LC_CTYPE` different from others? This was independent of my terminal because
it happened both to Terminal and iTerm2. Even more confusingly, I had been
synchronizing my shell configurations, and this didn’t happened on my old Mac
mini running macOS Mojave. Maybe something changed in Catalina?

The MacPorts ticket was closed since it’s not a MacPorts issue. Clemens
said that the broken locale on macOS was a known issue; he suggested simply
overriding them in `.profile`. I didn’t like this solution because:

 1. I don’t like setting the language twice. I already set it in System
    Preferences, and the terminal emulator should have picked it up.
 1. I synchronizes my configuration files between different machines; on some of
    them I want the interface in Chinese, others in English. Hardcoding won’t
    work, while computing the right locale could be fragile or complicated.

Nevertheless, I decided to do that with a “temporary solution” note. After that,
I started drafting a feature request for iTerm2 to set the `$LANG` based on
system language, hoping that this could be my long-term solution. In the issue
description I planned to add a screenshot for the “Language & Region” preference
panel; not until then did I find the culprit.

## root cause

My *Language* was set to “Chinese (China)”, but the *Region* was set to United
States. macOS tries to set up `$LANG` by combining the language and region,
which is *very confusing* because the Language field already contains region!
For example, if you set language to “English (UK)” and region to “United
States”, then your `$LANG` would be `en_US.UTF-8` instead of `en_GB.UTF-8`.

To confuse you even more, they decided *not* to set a `$LANG` when the
combination is unknown (in my case `zh_US` is invalid), *without warning user*!
I think there is some room for improvement in the preference panel; at least add
a warning symbol with a message like

> Your language doesn’t match your region; some application may not work as
> expected.

## side story

On Linux, when `$LANG` is Chinese, `ls -l` prints month name in Chinese, like
“2月”. macOS doesn’t have this nice feature for either BSD one or GNU one, and
months are formatted as numbers. I ended up prepending `LC_TIME=en_US.UTF-8` to
my `ll` alias, making the date “Feb 3 2020” instead of “2 3 2020”. This is macOS
specific, so the alias definition wasn’t synchronized.
